---
title: Citera
date: 2021-07-02 19:00:00 +0200

view:
  src: https://filedn.eu/lwI1LDSpBGNhFdgdym0FqY7/i/t/2021-07-02/citera-sumava.jpg
  alt: Šumava's preserved citera

mood: happy
weather: rain
activity: sitting
type: ticket

steps: 9647
azm: 64
distance: 6.47 km
floors: 27

gps: 49.023648, 13.499187

gallery:
  - images:
    - src: https://filedn.eu/lwI1LDSpBGNhFdgdym0FqY7/i/t/2021-07-02/citera-muller-2.jpg
      alt: A citera with a higher, happier, and a more energetic tone owned by Michal Müller
    - src: https://filedn.eu/lwI1LDSpBGNhFdgdym0FqY7/i/t/2021-07-02/citera-muller-1.jpg
      alt: A deeper sounding citera, suited for sad and slow songs, owned by Michal Müller
    
published: true
---
So, Michal Müller happened to be in town when I was visiting my relatives. He was performing solo for the town and 
whomever got a ticket (not an expensive one). It's interesting, I had no idea this instrument was still a thing. 
Apparently he's the only educated zither (citera) player, as well as being a teacher of the zither.[^cit-1]

You see, back in 
1900s, right after the whole World Wars thing, during the organized efforts trying to reverse Germanization in Czech 
Republic (also called Czech National Revival or Národní Obrození)... for some unholy reason, the Czech people (I guess 
I should say we) got rid of most zithers - and I mean got rid as in mass burnings kind of thing.

Yeah, there were hundreds of thousands of 
them manufactured and exported to other regions of Europe (it became very popular in Germany), every family had one, 
and we destroyed them as something German (now, bear in mind that Czech culture was seizing to exist, so that's why 
everything that even resembled the empire had to go). Nowadays it's used in Germany and other countries.

Back to the zither. It's a relatively new instrument, originating sometime in early 19th century... let's say 160 
years. It sounds absolutely beautiful. It's a sort of a cross between a violin and a piano I guess? You can play 
anything on it, from folk songs to blues or Led Zeppelin. 

The unfortunate thing is that it's difficult to learn it. Partly thanks to the fact that in our country only a single 
person teaches it (mr. Müller himself).

The town had a single zither available on display - a local one, preserved in the Šumava region. The player said it 
could be used if it was strung and prepared properly. Very interesting.

[^cit-1]: http://www.michal-muller.cz/en_profile.php